# Chapter II

*It is useful to christians to discern the signs of the times, and to be ready for all the will of God—Providence bids us prepare for sufferings; we have need to do so—Suffering is hard to sense, and the excellency of a christian—The prepared christian is a happy man, and the unprepared miserable.*

Two things are of great use to Christians; the one is, to discern the signs of the time. He that looks without and sees the state of things there, and then turns to Scripture, and there sees the issues that wait upon such states, may discern the signs of the time. The luxury of the old world was a sign of the deluge; the persecution of the prophets was a sign of Jerusalem’s desolation. When Ephesus declined, and left its first love, the candlestick was removing: when Laodicea was lukewarm, God was ready to spue them out of his mouth. And so it is in other things; such and such a state of things will have such and such an issue. The discerning of this will make Christians time their duties, and do everything in the true season of it, which is no less profitable than beautiful. The other thing is, to be ready for all the will of God; to have graces aptly answering to providence. Such holy joy as may tune the heart to prosperity, and such humble submission as may frame the heart to adversity: this is that blessed temper that bids everything welcome that comes in the will of God.

If we observe the signs of our times, we may easily discern judgments a coming; and therefore nothing can be more necessary than to prepare for sufferings. God hath a controversy with us, and seems to speak to us by his providence, as he did to Israel by his prophet, “Prepare to meet thy God.” Sit down then, O christians, and consider how to do it, and think with yourselves, with what penitential tears, wrestling, supplications, real reformations, and holy resignations you will meet with him. Jesus Christ, the captain of your salvation, seems now to ask you by his providence, as the Roman general did his soldiers, “Are you ready?” Reflect upon yourselves, and consider, are you ready to keep the word of Christ’s patience, to take up his cross and follow him? Though the cross be not yet upon your backs, yet you must carry it in your hearts; your minds must be ready at his call to suffer anything, rather than to part with the gospel.

Preparation is necessary to every good work. The pagan priests had preparatory washings before the sacrifice; the people had a hoc age cried to them to awaken their attention. The Jews were to wash their clothes at the giving of the law; they had their preparations to sabbaths and ordinances. Christians are to prepare for the wood and for the holy table; but above all, preparation is necessary to sufferings. The greater the thing is, the more requisite is the preparation. Suffering is a great thing, hard to sense, harsh to flesh and blood. It may be it takes away the worldly goods, which are dear to men; it may be it comes nearer, and touches the bone and the flesh, which is dearer than outward things; it may be it goes further, and treads down the precious life, which is highly valuable. Nature, in the best, shrinks and flies away from such things as these; and supernatural graces and assistances lift up men above themselves, they will never bear them. In such a case as this we have need to put on all our spiritual armour; not this or that piece only, but all of it; and not only to put it on, but to gird it on too: all will be little enough to make us stand in the evil day. Again, the more excellent a thing is, the more requisite is the preparation. Suffering for Christ is the excellency of a christian, the top and complement of all his graces: faith cannot rise higher; love cannot show itself better than in this. No profession of Christianity is so high, nor imitation of Christ so full, as that which is made in blood. Here is the christian’s consummatum est, his work is done, and heaven opens to receive him into glory. And how should we prepare our souls, and gird up the loins of our minds, that we may be capable of that which is the highest stature of a christian in this world, and the nearest capacity to a better.

This preparation is of very great moment to christians; upon their having or not having it, depends their happiness or misery.

He that is prepared for sufferings, come what will come, is a happy man; if sufferings do not come, he is yet a martyr in mind and purpose. God sees the suffering frame that is in him; his willing mind is accepted as much as if his blood were actually shed; and being ready to die for Christ, he is ready to live with him in heaven; if sufferings come he is provided for them. St. Paul was ready to be bound and die for the name of Jesus. Polycarp, when threatened with various deaths, made this reply, Quid tardas? “Why dost thou delay? Inflict what thou wilt.” The prepared christian is ready for all the will of God, which is a happiness that no suffering can interrupt. He is in a posture to overcome all the world, and he will do it. The very pagan emperors did observe the primitive martyrs to be victors in death. It is said of the martyr Vicentius, that according to his name, he overcame in words, and overcame in punishments; overcame in confession, and overcame in tribulation; overcame in fire, and overcame in water; overcame living, and overcame dying. The prepared christian is a Vincent, a conqueror of the world; his love is above the smiles of it, his fear above the terrors of it. Nay, he is more than a conqueror, he overcomes by suffering, and lives by death; nay, being dead, he yet speaks forth the truth he suffered for, and propagates it to all posterity. Neither need we wonder at this conquest, he is not alone but hath God with him. And, as the emperor Antoninus Verus said of the primitive christians, “He carries God about with him in conscience;” and where God is, there must be happiness in the most afflicted condition; the whole sacred Trinity are present with him; the everlasting Father will strengthen him: the Son will walk with him in the fiery furnace; the Holy Spirit will come to him with all his cordials. Stephen was never so full of it as when he was stoned. The martyr Felicitas professed to her persecutor, that she had the Holy Spirit in her. The prepared christian hath a spirit of power in infirmities, a spirit of glory in reproaches, a spirit of comfort in distresses. There are no such rich anointings as those that wait upon the cross of Christ. At other times a christian hath some measures of the Spirit; but then he hath such large effusions of it, that no sufferings can make him miserable. The clouds without cannot break the serenity in his conscience; the noise of a troublesome world cannot interrupt that divine peace which keeps his heart; no malice of man can hinder the sheddings of God’s love into him; no wants or exigencies can deprive him of the hidden manna promised to the overcomer; he is happy even in a vale of tears; and what will he be in heaven? There his reward will be great, nay, greater than that of others.

On the other hand; he that is not prepared for sufferings, is a miserable man: he hath a name of religion, and that is all; a notion of the gospel, but without a root; he hath a false Christ, that is, a Christ without a cross, but the right Christ he knows not; a pretence to heaven he hath, but he is not in a posture for it, neither will he go thither in a hard way: if sufferings come, he is snared, as fishes in an evil net; the surprise will rob him of that which he seems to have; he will not have so much as the name or notion of religion left: Christ will be an offence, or stumbling-block to him: heaven itself will not be worth suffering for. Thus those of the stony ground received the word with joy; but because their hearts were not ready for it, as soon as persecution arose they were offended. Thus it was observed among the primitive christians, that the unready and unprepared did faint and fall in time of persecution. The cup of sufferings is bitter, nature starts at it: the unprepared christian rather than drink it, will in all likelihood turn apostate in the day of trial; prosperous error will be embraced by him before persecuted truth; idolatry with the world will go down better than the pure worship without it; Christ coming in poverty and tribulation, will be forsaken; antichrist, appearing in the pomp and outward greatness of the world, will he followed: mere vanity will outweigh all the great offers of the gospel; a soul and a God will be laid at stake for a little outward prosperity; and what a forlorn condition is this! and, without repentance, how dismal must the end be! The good God, whom he hath forsaken, will depart from him; Jesus Christ the Saviour will cast him out; a curse and a blast will be upon his prosperity; a sting and a wound in conscience will make him weary of himself; in a word, he will become loathsome to God, men, and himself. It is storied, that in the third century the tokens of God’s wrath came in an extraordinary way upon those christians that fell off in time of persecution; some of them were struck dumb, some vexed with devils, some tormented in their bowels unto death; and, though not in these ways, yet in other will his wrath come down upon all apostates; if they are not dumb before men, they will be speechless before God; if devils vex not their bodies, they will yet possess their souls; if there be no torments in their bowels, yet there are in their consciences. The miseries which apostates incur, are much greater than those which they avoid by their apostacies. It is, therefore, highly reasonable, that we should prepare for sufferings, lest by apostacy we make ourselves more miserable, than any outward suffering can make us.
