#Chapter III

*Preparation for sufferings considered more generally—A christian that wilt be prepared for sufferings must secure to himself three things; that is, a good cause, a good heart, and a good God.*

Having seen the necessity of persecution, and the necessity of preparation, I come now to the main thing intended; to consider how a Christian may be prepared for sufferings: and here I shall first speak in general, and then more particularly. In general, a Christian, that would be prepared for sufferings, must secure to himself three things; a good cause, a good heart, and a good God: the first will make suffering honourable; the second will make us meet for it; the third will give assistance and comfort in it.

1. The Christian must secure to himself a good cause; he must take care not to suffer as an evil doer; this is not grateful to God, nor honourable among men; in it Christ is not imitated, but Christianity is shamed: such sufferers are the devil’s martyrs; it cannot be reasonably expected that they should have the gracious presence of God, or any comfort in conscience; their own hearts cry out, guilty, and plainly tell them, that their suffering is but the just wages of their iniquity. A Christian must be sure, that there be no guilt in that which he suffers for. Holy Daniel saith, that innocency was found in him, (Dan. 6:22). He speaks not of the innocency of his person, as if he were without sin; but of the innocency of his cause, for which he suffered: his praying against a law did not merit a den of lions; he broke the human command only to keep the divine. It highly concerns the Christian to have an innocent cause; it is the cause, not the mere suffering, that makes the martyr. Again, the Christian must take care that he suffer not as a busy-body in other men’s matter; he must not leave his own station, nor forfeit God’s protection, he must abide with God in his calling, and do his own business. God took care of the bird sitting over her young in her nest, (Deut. 22:6); but not of the wandering one. The learned Johannes Fancius, a minister of the gospel in his prince’s court, turned minister of state to his prince, and was at last, for some evil counsel, condemned to die; and before he suffered, he much lamented the leaving of his calling, and left this distich.

      “Disce meo exemplo mandato munere fungi,
      Et fuge ceu pestem τῆν πολυπραγμοσύνην.
      Learn this of me, thine own office to bear,
      In others meddle not, the plague is there.”

It is very uncomfortable to a Christian, when he runs into sufferings by going out of his own sphere. Moreover, the christian must take care, that he suffer not for his own rashness. He that defaced the emperor’s edict against Christians, and suffered for it, was not accounted a martyr. Bishop Audas demolished the Persian temple, dedicated to the fire, as their numen, and suffered for it; but it was reckoned as a piece of rash and unreasonable zeal. We must not cast ourselves into dangers; God will keep us in our ways, not in our precipices. We must take up the cross that God makes for us, but not make one of ourselves by our own rashness: if we must suffer, let it be for that good conscience which is a continual feast: for that righteousness, which is in conjunction with peace and joy in the Holy Ghost: let it be for that Jesus, who suffered for us; for that God, who crowns momentary sufferings with eternal glory. This was the case of the primitive christians; they suffered, but it was in a good cause. Justin Martyr and Athenagorus in their apologies for them, show that there was nothing amiss found in them; no atheism, no Thyestean suppers, no unclean copulations, no unjust actions, the only crime was Christianity. And afterwards Tertullian shows, That the name in christians was condemned, but no crime was found in them towards God or man. This is the first thing we are to do, we must secure a good cause.

2. We must secure good hearts. It is said of the children of Ephraim, “That being armed, and carrying bows, they turned back in the day of battle,” (Ps. 78:9); and the reason of this we have in the precedent verse, They set not their hearts aright. Unless the heart be good, as well as the cause, men will turn back from God, and the pure religion: corrupt hearts will fall in with the world, and ever be on the sunny side: in Dioclesian’s time they can be pagans; in Constantine’s, christians; in Constantius’s, Arians; in Julian’s, pagans again. It is the good heart only that is fit for sufferings. Now, two things are requisite to make a good heart; it must be purged from sin; and again, it must be furnished with principles of grace. 1. It must be purged from sin, from the guilt and power of it: it must be purged from the guilt of sin. A man that hath inward wounds is unfit to bear outward ones. Guilt upon conscience, like a boil upon the back, makes one incapable to bear the burden of a cross. They that are partakers of Christ’s sufferings in martyrdom, had need first partake of them for remission: they that wash their robes in the blood of the Lamb, by suffering for him, had need first wash their consciences in it to take away their guiltiness. It is not imaginable that a man can piously embrace a temporal death, when immediately after it he shall fall into an eternal one; or that he can patiently bear the wrath of man, when the wrath of God is to ensue upon it. It was a very forlorn case with the Egyptians, when they were drowning in the sea, and God looked through the cloud upon them: and so it will be with christians, if the world be as a troubled sea to them, and withal, God look with an angry face upon them: therefore it much concerns them to get a pardon sealed in the blood of Jesus Christ, that, when they come to suffer, they may have nothing to bear but the single cross, without any pressure of guilt upon conscience to aggravate it. Again; it must be purged from the power of sin. Every lust is a Delilah, an exhauster, as the Hebrew word signifies; it takes away the heart, drains and debases the man, makes him vile and impotent, and by consequence altogether incapable of so heroical a thing as suffering for God is: he that hath sin reigning in his heart, will comply with it reigning in the world; he that carrieth an idol within, will fall down to an outward one: such an one will do anything rather than suffer; the power of sin must be broken, that a man maybe ready to take up the cross. Further; the heart, that it may be good, must not only be purged from sin, but furnished with principles of grace. The old heart will not hear, or pray, or give alms, or do anything for God in a right manner, much less will it suffer for him. A man must have gracious principles, such as holy knowledge, faith, fear, love, zeal, hope, humility, obedience, and patience, are, that he may be ready for suffering. There is a double preparation for it, habitual and actual; habitual stands in the having those principles, and actual in the using of them. He that hath them hath a divine temper disposing him for every piece of the divine will; he is in the frame of his heart above creatures, and hath no centre but in his Creator; he is higher than time and this lower world, and lies upon the borders of heaven and eternity. His great concerns are not in the smiles and frowns of men, but in the will and favour of God. His fear is of greater evil than the world can inflict, and his expectation is of greater good than the world can bestow. His principles make him habitually ready for suffering, and when occasion comes, the use of them will make him actually so. Such an one may say at the fiery trial, as the famous Jerome of Prague did when the wood was laid to him, Salve festa dies, “Welcome thou joyful day of suffering for Christ.” This is the second thing, we must secure—good hearts.

3. We must secure a good God to be with us in our sufferings. A good cause will not bear us up without a good heart, nor will a good heart stand without a good God to support it. The prayer of David is very remarkable, “Let integrity and uprightness preserve me, for I wait on thee,” (Psalm 25:21). Integrity is a preservative, but we must wait on God to have our very integrity preserved, and pray, as the holy Psalmist doth in the precedent verse, “O keep my soul;” the most upright soul needs it. Graces keep the heart, but those very graces must be kept by the Keeper of Israel. The God of grace is as necessary to the new creature as the God of nature is to the old. If he withdraw, faith will fail, love will cool, hope will wither, zeal will be extinct, and all graces will vanish as the beams do upon the absence of the sun. The gracious presence of God is necessary to us at all times, especially in times of suffering. Joseph’s prison would have been very dismal, if God had not been there. When all men forsook Paul, he had been very forlorn if God had forsook him too. How hard is it to be in wants, if the All-sufficient one be gone! How intolerable are distresses, if the God of all comfort be absent! How shall we bear the cruelties of men, if the Father of mercies do not assist us? Or how shall we stand under our own creature-weakness, if the never-fainting Creator do not strengthen us! What shall we do in doubts, if the only wise One do not guide us? Or what shall we do in the valley of the shadow of death, if the living God be not with us? “The presence of God,” saith a worthy divine, “will turn a prison into a palace, a fiery furnace into a gallery of pleasure, and the stocks into a music school.” (Acts 16:25). I may add, it is instead of all things to us. With it no suffering can be too heavy; without it none can be tolerable. Let us therefore labour to secure this presence with us, and for that end, let us secure our being in Christ, and our walking in him. First, let us secure our being in Christ. God manifest in the flesh, is the foundation of God’s inhabiting in the spirits of men. If Christ had not come and mediated for us, God would never have come to dwell and to walk in us. If we are in Christ, God, who is personally present with his human nature, will be graciously present with us as members of him. We shall be preserved in Christ, as pieces of him, by that special presence which accompanies those that are in him. Our blessed Saviour prays, that those that were given him might be kept through the Father’s name, (John 17:11), that is, through that divine power, wisdom, mercy, and grace, which is with them. Again, let us secure our walking in Christ: let us walk after his command and pattern; that is, in meekness of wisdom, in zeal for God’s glory, in readiness of obedience, in sweetness of charity, in an universal compliance with the divine will. Let there be somewhat of Christ in every step; this is the way to have the divine presence with us. Thus our Saviour left us, “If any man love me he will keep my words, and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him,” (John 14:23). Such as keep his words, shall have the Shechinah, the divine presence, in a peculiar manner with them. This will be to them joy in sorrow, security in fears, strength in weakness, life in death, and all things in the want of all.
